# Self-Assessment
My enrollment in the Computer Science program at SNHU can be considered non-traditional. I started my collegiate endeavors towards Computer Science in 2013 at Boise State University (BSU). Before starting my formal education, I spent time learning Object-Oriented Programming in C# through various self-taught online resources. When I started the Computer Science program at BSU I found it easy to keep up and knew I was on the path I wanted to pursue long-term. However, my career was also taking off and I was asked to leave my home state of Idaho and move to Florida; this put my education on hold. Driven by the desire to move into the Software Engineering career-space I enrolled at SNHU, which presented an online solution for both my transient lifestyle and desired degree. 
<br><br>
A large part of what I’ve pursued academically is for the intent that what I’ve learned will be transferred to an occupation. Beyond programming itself, these skills include working with teams and stakeholders to achieve a certain goal. My current experience in the industry has proven that teamwork will be a constant. SNHU has provided coursework in understanding Agile and Waterfall SDLCs as well as Source/Version Control systems. Each of these concepts shape how a team coordinate to accomplish a task. Communication in all instances is a recurring theme, as work that you do or documentation you neglect can directly impact the product being worked on by others. Similarly, an emphasis was shown in these courses to maintain constant communication with stakeholders (clients, business leaders, colleagues, etc...). The interpretation by individuals for the scope of a project may differ greatly, and communication helps unify a mutual understanding. For this same reason, it is important to demonstrate frequent progress to stakeholders to avoid wasting resources creating a product that does not meet specifications/intent. Projects can be highly intricate, and constant communication ensures all parties are working towards the same end goal. 
<br><br>
My education in both state school and SNHU’s online program provided a unique set of experiences that helped mold my programming capabilities in different ways. One valuable lesson was the concept to familiarize myself with more programming languages than just one. BSU heavily focused curriculum around Java while SNHU had courses in Java, C++, and Python. Prior to taking these courses I had no familiarity in working with C++ or Python. This has demonstrated to me the importance of honing my understanding in underlying concepts of programming, since they are generally translatable. Someday I may find myself in a situation where I'm on a team that utilizes different languages for separate projects, so it is important to be adaptable in this regard. Additionally, throughout both BSU and SNHU’s Computer Science program I have considered various career paths, and ultimately determined I want to pursue a career in web application development. Part of this career choice entails the ability to work with databases and APIs. SNHU has provided coursework in both SQL and NoSQL, the latter of which I had no prior experience with before this program. In my Client/Server Development course, we used MongoDB and Python to build an API that had CRUD capabilities to a NoSQL database. My current occupation uses both NoSQL and SQL depending on the system, so I know being competent in both is a valuable skill to have. 
<br><br>
In IT 312 Software Development w/ C++ .Net, we developed a turn-based dice game for our final project. The game I chose to do for my final project in that class was called Liar’s Dice. I chose this as the enhancement artifact for all three areas (Design, Algorithms, and Databases) because it showcases my work as a program entirely written by myself. This means I had to interpret the rules of the game, design the structure of the code around those rules, and implement all functions according to my interpretation. The first enhancement I made demonstrates the quality of language adaptability, through taking the base application that I wrote in C++ and rebuilding it line-by-line with C#. Once converted to a C# code base, I focused the next enhancement phase on a more complex algorithm around gameplay functionality. This algorithm handled maintenance of the data structures in the code base, so that the application was suited for an indefinite number of consecutive gameplay sessions. The final enhancement was a major shift to support API and database functionality so that the application could ultimately be moved from a local console instance to a web application. These enhancements were all chosen to demonstrate transformation of a simple application to implement improved usability, scalability, and modernization. 
<br><br>

# Code Review
### [Liar's Dice Code Review](https://youtu.be/BnCeVtF9PVs)
The above link provides access to my recorded Code Review for the original C++ code base of the Liar's Dice application, prior to making any changes.
<br><br>

# Enhancement One: Software Design and Engineering
### [Enhancement One Code Base](https://github.com/smwhitaker4/smwhitaker4.github.io/tree/main/EnhancementOne/LiarsDiceEnchancements)
This program was originally written in C++ which presented an opportunity to demonstrate my ability to take concepts from one program and rework them syntactically to another. The entire code base has now been rewritten using C# .Net Core. After my code review, I determined there were a few areas are of my code that needed enhancing even after the transfer to C#. I added exception handling in all relevant instances; user input sanitization was added to protect from malicious attacks; the ability to dynamically name users, as opposed to a default name assignment, was also implemented to give the user a more customized experience. Along with these changes I have set the code up with TODO comments that will be handled in the algorithm rework for the next Milestone. With these changes I feel confident that I have satisfied the enhancement portion I anticipated from Module One.
<br><br>
In the transfer of my code to C# and implementing enhancements I learned that you should assume nothing from your user. The original code base had a lot of assumed user behavior such as entering numbers where needed and that the game would be used as intended. Just because the program provided favorable results in my own isolated testing does not mean it’s impervious to error and vulnerabilities. In stepping through each line and writing the C# equivalent I tried to approach everything with the mindset of whatever can go wrong will go wrong. This helped to see more security vulnerabilities as well as enhance behavior to avoid crashing and other such poor user experiences.
<br><br>

# Enhancement Two: Algorithms and Data Structure
### [Enhancement Two Code Base](https://github.com/smwhitaker4/smwhitaker4.github.io/tree/main/EnhancementTwo/LiarsDiceEnchancements)
The primary modification I performed was creating an algorithm for providing replay-ability. This changed required the maintenance of data from one session to the next which was one of the main causes for concern. I chose to implement a series of Lists as my data structures for the Player and Dice objects. Persisting data from one session to the next can add odd behavior if not handled correctly. I learned that this issue was particularly true when it came to the matter of enforcing rules of the game. After I created the algorithm that cleaned data for the next session (reset counts and clearing lists), I simultaneously opened the ability to add and remove players. Thinking I was done, I ran some test instances of the game and found out that validation for number of players could be circumvented. I had been so focused on making sure the game data would be correct in the next session that I neglected to implement re-validation of the game rules. I created logic to correct this exploit and reran instances of the game, assessing behavior with this new logic in mind. Learning that not only maintaining data integrity but validation as well was one of my key takeaways in this exercise. Ultimately, the goal to add indefinite replay capability to the game was achieved.
<br><br>

# Enhancement Three: Databases
### [Enhancement Three Code Base](https://github.com/smwhitaker4/smwhitaker4.github.io/tree/main/EnhancementThree/LiarsDiceApi)
Through this project I wanted to focus on a radical change that demonstrated my abilities to take a limited console application, with virtually no scalability, and transform the code to support API and database read/write functionality. This allows for the program to move towards web application capabilities, eventually including an improved user interface. The number of changes that were involved in the transfer of the console application to a web API and database integration support were extensive. The time it took to design and setup the transformation took almost as long as writing the code itself. The shift of thought process from how someone interacts with a console window versus a web interface was something I constantly had to pause and re-evaluate. Having more time in the course this application would have eventually been hooked up with a front end (likely powered by Vue.js) to provide a full web app experience.
<br><br>
The changes involving API functionality and database integration also allowed me to display some skill in HTTP responses and database security. A conscious effort was made to use dependency injection to separate secrets from my code. I’ve spent a great deal of time studying how to securely integrate database communication inside of an application, and I am eager to continue enhancing my capabilities in this area. Same goes for HTTP responses and exception handling. In a “next iteration” scenario, I would spend a great deal of time here creating smart responses for reporting back more direct errors. There’s always room to enhance projects, but for now I am pleased with the outcome of this application change.
